---
layout: page
subheadline: "English Law"
title:  "A brief summary of English contract law (1)"
teaser: "offer + acceptance + intention to create legal relations + consideration + legality + capacity = contract."
breadcrumb: true
header:
  image_fullwidth: gallery-example-7.jpg
tags:
    - "english_law"
    - "my-writing" 
categories:
    - "english_law"
---

## The Offer

To form a contract, one party makes an offer which the other party accepts. The offering party is the offeror and the accepting party is the offeree. An offer in response to a previous offer is a counter-offer, which rejects the previous offer.

An offer in the legal sense is ‘an expression of willingness to contract on specified terms made with the intention that it is to become binding as soon as it is accepted by the person to whom it is addressed’ (_Chitty on Contract_ (32nd edn, Sweet & Maxwell 2017)).

To answer the question whether an offer constitutes an offer in the legal sense, the formality of contract is not necessarily the determinable factor (for instance it may be written or unwritten), as long as the offer communicates. 

## The intention to be binding is objective

There must be objectively an intention in the expression that the offer is to become binding. Whether there is intention of a binding offer is an objective question. 

For example, the offer to sell was held valid and intended to be binding where the seller of oats had sold to a buyer, who said he wanted it to feed the racehorse; however, the seller did not mention that the oats were suitable for that purpose (_Smith v Hughes_ (1871) LR 6 QB 609). 

The intention of the offer becoming binding is objective, a meeting of minds between the parties in negotiating or concluding the contract is not necessary, since no one can be certain of each party’s mind at any point. The seller knew the oats were not suitable for the buyer, and he did not mention more about it. The offer was simply to sell the oats, having not included any term regarding its quality or whether it was fit for the purpose of the buyer. Were he to make comments about the quality or suitability of the oats to be used as horse feed and induce the buyer to rely on false promises before the buyer decided to buy, the buyer would have been able to get his money back for the seller’s ‘misrepresentation’ or a ‘mistake’. 

Neither does the offeror (the seller in the above case) need to subjectively intend on making a binding offer, as long as he apparently makes an offer in the nature of having the objective intention to be binding. This means, the offeror may find himself in a situation of being in a binding contract without knowing he has made a binding offer. Adverts are usually ‘invitations to treat’ rather than binding offers, but they could be binding and be accepted if the wording gives rise to such intention objectively. 

## The subjective mind of the offeree

However, the intention to contract is not free from the subjective mind. It may be free from the subjective mind of the offeror, but not free from the offeree. – The offeree must actually believe that an apparent offer is intended to be binding to hold it against the offeror (_Allied Marine Transport v Vale do Rio Doce Navegacao SA (The Leonidas)_ [1985] 1 WLR 925). 

If the offeree knows the apparent offer was not intended to be binding, the offer is not binding even if it appears so, objectively. 

If the offeree does not know that the offeror has not intended to make a binding offer, but ought to have known that, there is no intention to be binding (_OT Africa Line Ltd v Vickers Plc_ [1996] 1 Lloyd’s Rep. 700). 

Indifference or ignorance of the offeree as to such intention, namely a lack of positive belief of the offeror’s intention to be bound, is likely not enough to hold against the offeror. – This is subject to academic debate. 

## Construction of contract

Where a battle of forms arises (i.e. where the parties compete to insert their own terms into the contract by way of counter-offers continuously during negotiation), it may be difficult to pinpoint the terms of the unrejected (counter) offer or whether such terms were agreed. 

Performance of the contract may commence before the parties have fully agreed the terms, or finalised the formality of the contract. – This may not hinder the existence of the contract, as a contract can be agreed by conduct. But it may create a problem in ascertaining the terms agreed. 

It has been suggested that the objective intention of the terms may be disregarded if the parties have acted in accordance with other terms unexpressed (_Chitty on Contract_ (32nd edn, Sweet & Maxwell 2017) 2-004). For example, if parties acted contrary to the agreed written terms, which are what the contract is objectively intended, the written contract should be disregarded to the extend it is replaced by the newer terms agreed by the parties, provided there is no prohibition to the change at the time of concluding the written agreement. This view may be challenged if the newer agreement lacks ‘consideration’ – an existing duty under the former contract. An existing contractual duty cannot become the consideration of a newer agreement. 

## Other English law posts
{: .t60 }
{% include list-posts tag='english_law' %}
